Review of the GSG - first part (#408)
neo4j/docs-getting-started: modules/ROOT/pages/cypher.adoc

----

If the node is not relevant to your return results, you can also specify an anonymous node using empty parentheses `()`.
However, you can't return anonymous nodes later in the query.

[source,cypher]
----
()                //anonymous node (no label or variable) can refer to any node in the database
----

You can also refrain from using a variable for certain nodes:

[source,cypher]
----
(:Technology)     //no variable, label Technology
----

Or use a whole word as the variable:

[source,cypher]
----
(work:Company)   //using variable work and label Company
----

[#cypher-relationships]
=== Relationships

One of the benefits of graph databases is that you can store information about how elements are related to each other in the form of relationships between the elements (nodes).

In Cypher, relationships are represented as square brackets and an arrow connecting two nodes (e.g. `(Node1)-[]->(Node2)`), as how you may draw a relationship on a whiteboard.

In the example, the lines containing `:LIKES`, `:IS_FRIENDS_WITH`, and `:WORKS_FOR` represent the relationship between the nodes:

.Graph featuring nodes and relationships.
image::cypherintro-graph1.svg[]

> [NOTE]
> ====
> Best practice is to write the relationship type in upper-case, preceded by a colon (`:`).
> ====

Reviewer: I think this is misleading. As you note later, not including colons creates a different query.
```suggestion
```

==== Relationship directions

Relationships *always* have a direction which is indicated by an arrow.

They can go from left to right:

[source,cypher]
----
(p:Person)-[:LIKES]->(t:Technology)
----

From right to left:

[source,cypher]
----
(p:Person)<-[:LIKES]-(t:Technology)
----

Or be undirected (where the direction is *not* specified):

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[:LIKES]-(t:Technology)
----

==== Undirected relationships

An undirected relationship does not mean that it doesn't have a direction, but that it can be traversed in *either* direction.
While you can't *create* relationships without a direction, you can *query* them undirected (in the example, using the link:{docs-home}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/match/[`MATCH`] clause).

Using undirected relationships in queries is particularly useful when you don't know the direction, since Cypher won't return anything if you write a query with the wrong direction.
Cypher will therefore retrieve *all* nodes connected by the specified relationship type, regardless of direction.

[CAUTION]
====

> Due to performance reasons, it is generally not recommended to query undirected relationships, especially in the case of larger datasets.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could remove the caution, but keep the mention that undirected relationships can impact the performance of the query?

====

==== Relationship types

Relationship types categorize and add meaning to a relationship, similar to how labels group nodes together.
It is considered best practice to use verbs or derivatives for the relationship type.
The type describes how the nodes relate to each other.
This way, Cypher is almost like natural language, where nodes are the subjects and objects (nouns), and the relationships (verbs) are the action words that relate them.

In the previous example, the relationship types are:

* `[:LIKES]` - communicates that Sally (a node) _likes_ graphs (another node).
* `[:IS_FRIENDS_WITH]` - communicates that Sally _is friends with_ John.
* `[:WORKS_FOR]` - communicates that Sally _works for_ Neo4j.

==== Relationship variables

Variables can be used for relationships in the same way as for nodes. 
Once you specify a variable, you can use it later in the query to reference the relationship.

Take this example:

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person)-[r:LIKES]->(t:Technology)
RETURN p,r,t
----

This query specifies variables for both the node labels (`p` for `Person` and `t` for `Technology`) and the relationship type (`r` for `:LIKES`).

> In the return clause, you can then use the variables (i.e.`p`, `r`, and `t`) instead of spelling out the full node labels and relationship type.

Reviewer: This is not an alternative - spelling out everything again does not work 
```suggestion
In the return clause, you can then use the variables (i.e.`p`, `r`, and `t`) to return the bound entities.
```

This would be your result:

.Result for the example query using node and relationship variables.
image::cypherintro-variables.svg[]

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| p | r | t

| (:Person) | [:LIKES]  | (:Technology)

3+d|Rows: 1
|===

Remember to always put a colon in front of a relationship type.
If you happen to forget it, and write the query like this:

[source,cypher]
----
(Person)-[LIKES]->(Technology)
----

> `[LIKES]` will represent a relationship *variable*, not a relationship *type*.

Reviewer: In this example Person and Technology would also be variables.
```suggestion
`[LIKES]` will represent a relationship *variable*, not a relationship *type*.
```

In this case, since no relationship type is declared, Cypher will search for all types of relationships in order to retrieve a result to your query.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For more information,see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/patterns/fixed-length-patterns/#relationship-patterns[Cypher Manual -> Patterns -> Relationship patterns].
```

[#cypher-properties]
=== Properties

Property values can be added both to nodes and relationships.
They can also be of a variety of data types.
For a full list of values and types, see link:{docs-home}cypher-manual/current/values-and-types/[Cypher manual -> Values and types].

Another way to organize the data in the previous example would be to add a *property*, `name`, and `Sally` and `John` as *property values* on `Person`-labeled nodes:

.Graph example with node and relationship properties.
image::cypherintro-properties.svg[]

[source,cypher]
----

> CREATE (Person {name:'Sally'})-[:IS_FRIENDS_WITH]->(Person {name:'John'})
> RETURN p,r

Reviewer: The variables are not bound in this example, so the return clause would be empty.
```suggestion
CREATE (sally:Person {name:'Sally'})-[r:IS_FRIENDS_WITH]->(:Person {name:'John'})
RETURN sally, r
```

----

Note that properties are enclosed by curly brackets (`{}`), and with its content enclosed by apostrophes (`''`).

> In case you have already added Sally and John as node labels, but want to change them into node properties, you need to refactor your graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you have already added `Sally` and `John` as node labels, but want to change them into node properties, you need to refactor your graph.
```

Refactoring is a strategy in link:{docs-home}/model[data modeling] that you can learn more about in link:{docs-home}/getting-started/data-modeling/graph-model-refactoring/[this tutorial].

[#cypher-patterns]
=== Patterns in Cypher

> As mentioned before, Cypher is heavily based on patterns and it is designed to recognize them in data.

Reviewer: Maybe reuse what is in Cypher Manual
```suggestion
Graph pattern matching sits at the very core of Cypher. It is the mechanism used to navigate, describe, and extract data from a graph by applying a declarative pattern.
```

For example:

[source, cypher]
----
(p:Person {name: "Sally"})-[rel:LIKES]->(g:Technology {type: "Graphs"})
----

This bit of Cypher represents a pattern, but it is not a query.

> It only expresses that `Person` node with _Sally_ as its `name` property has a `:LIKES` relationship with the `Technology` node with _Graphs_ as its `type` property.

Reviewer: Technically p and g can reference multiple nodes, but I guess it is clear from the context that it is one for each.

```suggestion
It only expresses that a `Person` node with _Sally_ as its `name` property has a `:LIKES` relationship to the `Technology` node with _Graphs_ as its `type` property.
```

In order to *do* something with this pattern, such as adding it to or retrieving it from the graph, you need to *query* the database.

For example, you can add information to the database:

[source, cypher]
----
CREATE (p:Person {name: "Sally"})-[r:LIKES]->(t:Technology {type: "Graphs"})

> ----

Reviewer: Given what has gone before, I reckon this section could just start with the query.

And once this data is written to the database, you can retrieve it with this pattern:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Person {name: "Sally"})-[r:LIKES]->(t:Technology {type: "Graphs"})
RETURN p,r,t
----

> 

Reviewer: We should also say something about binding patterns to variables, and that patterns can be returned. 

e.g. MATCH p=(:Person)-[]->(:Technology)
RETURN p

Also, I think this page should mention something about variable length patterns maybe?

==== Node labels

Nodes can be grouped together through a <<label>>.
They work like tags and allow you to specify certain types of entities to look for or to create.
Labels also help Cypher distinguish between entities and optimize execution for your queries.

In the example, both `Sally` and `John` can be grouped under a `Person` label, `Graphs` can receive a `Technology` label, and `Neo4j` can be labeled as `Company`:

.Nodes grouped in labels. Note that `Sally`, `John`, `Graphs`, and `Neo4j` are now xref:cypher.adoc#cypher-properties[properties] instead.
image::cypher-graph-nodes-arr.svg[role="popup-link",width=450]

In a relational database context, this would be the same as telling SQL which table to look for the particular row.
The same way you can tell SQL to query a person's information from a `Person` table, you can also tell Cypher to only check the `Person` label for that information.

[CAUTION]
====
If you do not specify a label for Cypher to filter out non-matching node categories, the query will check all of the nodes in the database.
This can affect performance in very large graphs.
====

==== Node variables

You don't need to refer to a label always in full.

> Similarly to abbreviations and other programming language variables, node variables can be used as a shortcut.

Reviewer 2: I would rewrite the sentence and remove the word _shortcut_.

|===
| p | r | t

| (:Person) | [:LIKES]  | (:Technology)

3+d|Rows: 1
|===

Remember to always use a colon in front of a relationship type.
If you happen to forget it, and write the query like this:

[source,cypher]
----
(Person)-[LIKES]->(Technology)
----

`[LIKES]` will represent a relationship *variable*, not a relationship *type*.
In this case, since no relationship type is declared, Cypher will search for all types of relationships in order to retrieve a result to your query.

[#cypher-properties]
=== Properties

Property values can be added both to nodes and relationships.
They can also be of a variety of data types.
For a full list of values and types, see link:{docs-home}cypher-manual/current/values-and-types/[Cypher manual -> Values and types].

Considerintg the previous example, another way to organize the same data would be to add Sally and John in the database not as a label of the node type `Person`, but as a node property such as `name`:

.Graph example with node and relationship properties.
image::cypherintro-properties.svg[]

[source,cypher]
----
CREATE (Person {name:'Sally'})-[:IS_FRIENDS_WITH]->(Person {name:'John'})
RETURN p,r
----

> Note that properties are enclosed by curly brackets (`{}`), and with its content enclosed by apostrophes (`''`).

Reviewer 2: That's a relationship type. The syntax for properties: {key:"value"}.

In the example, both `Sally` and `John` can be grouped under a `Person` label, `Graphs` can receive a `Technology` label, and `Neo4j` can be labeled as `Company`:

.Nodes grouped in labels. Note that `Sally`, `John`, `Graphs`, and `Neo4j` are now xref:cypher.adoc#cypher-properties[properties] instead.
image::cypher-graph-nodes-arr.svg[role="popup-link",width=450]

In a relational database context, this would be the same as telling SQL which table to look for the particular row.
The same way you can tell SQL to query a person's information from a `Person` table, you can also tell Cypher to only check the `Person` label for that information.

[CAUTION]
====
If you do not specify a label for Cypher to filter out non-matching node categories, the query will check all of the nodes in the database.
This can affect performance in very large graphs.
====

==== Node variables

Though not mandatory, variables are particularly useful when querying a database, as they allow referencing specified nodes in subsequent clauses without writing their label in full.

Variables can be single letters or words, and should be written in lower-case.

> For example, if you want to bound all nodes labeled `Person` to the variable `p`, you write `(p:Person)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to bind all nodes labeled `Person` to the variable `p`, you write `(p:Person)`.
```

For the complete documentation, refer to link:{docs-home}/cypher/[Cypher].
====

.A visual representation of a Cypher query
image::cypher-learning-arr.svg[role="popup-link",width=450]

Cypher is Neo4j's declarative and link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/appendix/gql-conformance/[GQL conformant] query language. 
Available as open source via link:http://openCypher.org[The openCypher project], Cypher is link:{docs-home}/cypher-manual/current/introduction/cypher-overview/#_cypher_and_sql_key_differences[similar to SQL], but optimized for graphs.

Intuitive and close to natural language, Cypher provides a visual way of matching patterns and relationships by having its own design based on ASCII-art type of syntax:

[source,cypher]
----
(:nodes)-[:ARE_CONNECTED_TO]->(:otherNodes)
----

Round brackets are used to represent `(:Nodes)`, and `-[:ARROWS]->` to represent a relationship between the `(:Nodes)`.
With this query syntax, you can perform create, read, update, or delete (CRUD) operations on your graph.

[TIP]
====
For a quick look with no installation required, get a free link:https://neo4j.com/cloud/platform/aura-graph-database/[Aura instance].

> Click on the graduation cap icon on the top right section and to access "Query fundamentals", a hands-on guide on Cypher.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the graduation cap icon on the top right section to access the interactive guides.
The "Query fundamentals" gives you a hands-on introduction to Cypher.
```
